plan/phase-07-production-readiness-and-next-steps/steps/step-02-script-data-pipelines/tasks/task-02-extract-cleaning-logic-into-module.md, before:

## Task 02 – Extract Cleaning Logic into a Reusable Module

### Objective

Move your `clean_books` logic out of notebooks into a **Python module** so it can be reused by scripts and tests.

### Outputs

- A `src/cleaning.py` file with a function like `clean_books(df: pd.DataFrame) -> pd.DataFrame`.

### Steps

1. **Review existing cleaning steps in notebooks**

   - Find the notebook cells where you implemented cleaning (types, missing values, outliers, text normalization, etc.).

2. **Create `src/cleaning.py`**

   - Define a function signature, e.g.:
     - `def clean_books(df: pd.DataFrame) -> pd.DataFrame:`.

3. **Move cleaning logic into the function**

   - Copy the core transformations from the notebook into the function body.
   - Keep steps in a clear order (type casting, missing values, outliers, text normalization).

4. **Add docstrings and comments**

   - At the top of the function, describe:
     - Expected input DataFrame structure (columns).
     - Main cleaning rules applied.
     - What the function returns.

5. **Update notebooks to use the module**

   - Replace inline cleaning code in notebooks with:
     - `from src.cleaning import clean_books`
     - `df_clean = clean_books(df_raw)`.

6. **Run notebooks to confirm behavior**
   - Ensure cleaned results are equivalent to what you had before moving the logic.

### Checklist

- [ ] `src/cleaning.py` created.
- [ ] `clean_books` function implemented with documented rules.
- [ ] Notebooks import and use `clean_books`.
- [ ] Cleaned outputs validated against prior version.

Commit message:

Add initial data, docs, Docker setup, and pipeline code
Added cleaned books dataset, example people CSV, Docker configuration and requirements, initial documentation, SQL schema, and core Python scripts for data ingestion, cleaning, and analysis. Updated project plans and notes to reflect new structure and workflow. Added and updated tests for cleaning and ingestion modules.

plan/phase-07-production-readiness-and-next-steps/steps/step-02-script-data-pipelines/tasks/task-02-extract-cleaning-logic-into-module.md, after:

## Task 02 – Extract Cleaning Logic into a Reusable Module

### Objective

Move your `clean_books` logic out of analysis scripts into a **Python module** so it can be reused by scripts and tests.

### Outputs

- A `src/cleaning.py` file with a function like `clean_books(df: pd.DataFrame) -> pd.DataFrame`.

### Steps

1. **Review existing cleaning steps in analysis scripts**

   - Find the sections in your analysis scripts where you implemented cleaning (types, missing values, outliers, text normalization, etc.).

2. **Create `src/cleaning.py`**

   - Define a function signature, e.g.:
     - `def clean_books(df: pd.DataFrame) -> pd.DataFrame:`.

3. **Move cleaning logic into the function**

   - Copy the core transformations from the analysis script into the function body.
   - Keep steps in a clear order (type casting, missing values, outliers, text normalization).

4. **Add docstrings and comments**

   - At the top of the function, describe:
     - Expected input DataFrame structure (columns).
     - Main cleaning rules applied.
     - What the function returns.

5. **Update analysis scripts to use the module**

   - Replace inline cleaning code in analysis scripts with:
     - `from src.cleaning import clean_books`
     - `df_clean = clean_books(df_raw)`.

6. **Run analysis scripts to confirm behavior**
   - Ensure cleaned results are equivalent to what you had before moving the logic.

### Checklist

- [ ] `src/cleaning.py` created.
- [ ] `clean_books` function implemented with documented rules.
- [ ] Analysis Scripts import and use `clean_books`.
- [ ] Cleaned outputs validated against prior version.
